---
title: 'on webrtc'
date: "2025-03-16"
description: "browser to browser connections"
tags: ["network"]
---

got to know about a very interesting framework today - the webrtc. it is a google developed method that facilitates exchange of data and information between browsers by establishing a web p2p connection. and the best part about it is that it doesn’t require a server to transfer data. yes, it does require one to establish the newtork but that’s it. after the connection is setup, all transfer happens from the sender’s browser to the receiver’s without the play of any server in between. crazy innit? there have been a few implementations of this framework - browser to browser chat, video call and, the most interesting of them all, file transfer. there is a project called file.pizza which saves data and time by reducing the 2 step - upload, download cycle to a single step - transfer. only when the receiver requests for the file does the file gets transfered. no need to upload it to a mutually accessible place and downloading it, rather just get your unique file pizza link and share it over to the person accessing the file. however, a few drawbacks of this include the sender having to keep the link open until the receiver dowloads it and having to repeat the process over again everytime you want someone to download it, since the link gets terminated with the session’s end. it is but, at the end of the day, an interesting approach. i’m thinking of other applications of this, there are certain very intuitive ones - texting, video, mails - the entire sphere of information transfer - which is better this way by virtue of low data requirement and more security due to the lack of a central sever (kinda unsure about this point since there could always be attacks on the way). but these are only the very basic implementations of the framework. there has to be something novel, something that can leverage this platform to solve a bigger issue. [TBC]