The Metamorphosis by Franz Kafka is a beautiful short story depicting the intricacies of human psyche and relationships. The story starts off with Gregor, the family's sole breadwinner, waking up to find himself metamorphosed into a mammoth of an insect. Following that, Kafka describes the paradigm shift in the demeanour of those around him — his boss, his family, and even Gregor himself.

Despite this pathetic condition of his, Gregor never thinks of himself. Instead, his mind is flooded with the fear of getting late for the train he has to catch, failing which he’d surely get a reprimand from his boss. This portrays how blinded humankind nowadays is, running a rat race, trying to satisfy the unsatisfiable — their never-ending greed.

Upon realising Gregor’s handicap, the family understood that they must give up on the somewhat comfortable lives they were leading and get back to work in order to sustain themselves. His father picked up the job of a security guard; his mother took up tiny gags, and even his sister, Grete, although only seventeen, decided to go door to door working as a saleswoman.

And Gregor? Oh, he was not to be disturbed in his room. Owing to his pathetic condition, neither of his parents had the courage even to bear the sight of their metamorphosed son. In these circumstances, his sister took the responsibility of feeding her brother and cleaning his room. This continued for a while, but the initial warm love and compassion for her brother was eventually seen fading away. Specific incidents further catalysed this dwindling of emotions to the point that, leave alone his parents, even his sister, started perceiving Gregor as a burden. This further led to her pleading with her parents to get rid of it. And I’m right when I used ‘it’. She no longer believed that the insect could actually be her beloved brother, Gregor.

Owing to the above incidents, I believe that ‘The Metamorphosis’ isn’t just a story about Gregor’s metamorphosis but also that of his sister. Kafka has just portrayed what is often seen in families these days: an elderly member falling terminally ill is taken good care of, but only to a point. Despite what they have done for their families, the latter eventually start perceiving these people as burdens — financial and mental — and end up leaving them to their own disposal. Another relevant example could be how, after the passing away of a family member, they’re kept alive in the heads of their loved ones by memories but, with the due advent of time, even those memories fade away and along fades the emotional connection one had.

Kafka’s works are known for bitterly painful endings, and this one was no different. One night, just after observing his sister’s metamorphosis, frail due to the injuries and infections he had picked up, malnourished due to the sheer lack of food, and mentally broken due to the torments he had been through, Gregor exhaled his final breaths.

Along with Gregor went the various aspirations he held — sending his sister to music school, no matter the expenses, settling in a good apartment with his parents. Here’s Kafka providing us with another lesson for life — certain incidents might completely derail your healthy, happy and tranquil life, leaving you no choice but to accept fate and let go of what held utmost importance to you, of what you held closest to your heart. Therefore, wait not for the right time to act, for the right time is right now.